*** Transcriber's note: Please set your voice synthesiser to read most punctuation. When you encounter the caret sign (^) at the end of a line, please enter the applicable information, if necessary. ***

The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua

Request a document authentication or apostille

You will need to print this form.

If you need help with the process or filling in the form, there is more information online at www.govt.nz/authentications. Otherwise, contact the Authentication Unit:
Email: auth.unit@dia.govt.nz
Phone: +64 4 460 2221 (outside New Zealand)
Freephone: 0800 872 675

Before you send this application, you need to check:
1. the other country’s requirements, and
2. that your documents meet New Zealand’s requirements for an authentication or apostille. 

1. Organisations may have specific requirements for the age of the documents, any translations requirements, and document processing either as individual documents or as a set of documents. We can’t help with these requirements. You must contact the relevant authorities directly if you have questions about them.

2. Our department has specific requirements depending on the type of document. These requirements are on our website at www.govt.nz/authentications under 'Authentication Unit document requirements'.

Please answer the following 8 questions.

1. Name of the country (not New Zealand) where your document or documents will be presented. ^

2. Type of authentication for that country
The process is country specific so please check www.dia.govt.nz/document-authentication to find out if the country is an apostille or authentication country and for any specific requirements.

If it is an apostille country, do you want a paper apostille, an electronic apostille, or both? ^
The first apostille costs NZ$32.00.
Any additional apostilles cost NZ$15.00 each.
If you want both a paper apostille and an e-apostille, it costs NZ$47.00.

If it is an authentication country, do you want a paper authentication under category A or category B? ^
For category A authentications, the first authentication costs NZ$65.00 and any additional authentications cost NZ$31.00 each.
For category B authentications, the first authentication costs NZ$195.00 and any additional authentications costs NZ$61.00 each.

3. Number of documents
If you have only 1 document, go to question 4.
If you have more than 1 document, you can have them processed as a set, as individual documents or as a combination of sets and individual documents. A set means all documents will be bound together with 1 certificate of authentication or apostille. Otherwise each invididual document will have its own certificate of authentication or apostille. If you are requesting an apostille, we can only authenticate documents as a set if the signature or seal on the documents are the the same.
Do you want your documents processed as a set, as individual documents, or as a combination of sets and individual documents? ^
If you want a combination, describe which documents are part of each set and which are individual documents. ^

4. Do you need your document translated into another language? Yes or no ^
If no, go to question 5.
If yes, state which language you want your document translated into. ^
Provide the spellings of all names you want on the translation, if applicable. ^
Standard translation cost is $85.00 each. The Department of Internal Affairs Translation Service will tell you if the fee is different for your translation.

5. Your details
Name ^
Company name, if applicable ^
Email ^
Phone number ^

6. Delivery details
If you are ordering an e-apostille, we will email it to you.
Name ^
Address ^
City ^
State ^
Post code ^
Country ^
Contact phone number for this address ^

7. How do you want to get your documents returned to you? Type yes after the one that applies to you.
I would like to buy a courier bag. This costs $5.00 within New Zealand. ^
I would like to buy an international courier bag. ^
It costs $15.00 for an international courier bag to Australia and Asia-Pacific countries, $20.00 to the United States (not Canada), $25.00 to European countries including the UK, and $30.00 for the rest of the world.

8. Payment.
The amount to pay is a combination of the:
• authentication or apostille fee from questions 2 and 3
• translation fee from question 4, if applicable
• courier fee from question 7, if applicable
Type the total amount to pay. If left blank, we will deduct the correct fee if paying by credit card. ^

State how you want to pay. Type yes after the one that applies to you.
I enclose a cheque, bankdraft or money order in New Zealand dollars made out to the Department of Internal Affairs. ^
Invoice me. This is for New Zealand based corporate customers only. (New corporate customers should call or email our office to ask us to set this up for them.) Type the reference you want to appear on the invoice. ^
Charge my credit card.
State if it is a visa, mastercard or AMEX. ^
Card number ^
Expiry date ^
Cardholder’s name ^
Cardholder’s signature ^

9. Do you have any additional instructions? ^

Send form and documents by post, courier or deliver in person.

By post
Authentication Unit
PO Box 805
Wellington 6140
New Zealand

By courier
Authentication Unit
Level 1
120 Victoria Street
Te Aro
Wellington 6011
New Zealand

In person
Authentication Unit
Level 5
120 Victoria Street
Te Aro
Wellington 6011
New Zealand

Contact details
Email: auth.unit@dia.govt.nz
Phone: +64 4 460 2221 (outside New Zealand)
Freephone: 0800 872 675

Does your document require Notarisation by a NZ Notary?

• A Notary is a special type of lawyer, however not all lawyers are Notaries. 
• We will only accept documents notarised by those listed on http://notarypublic.org.nz  (i.e. we do not accept JP’s, Court Registrars, Lawyers).
• Fees vary between Notaries so you may want to phone more than one.
• The Notary will produce a “Notarial Act” which states exactly what they have done i.e. witnessed a signature or certified a true copy. 
• If you are overseas you should discuss with the Notary the best way to get your document to them.

1 Search for a Notary at http://notarypublic.org.nz 

2 Phone the Notary to make an appointment. 

3 Ensure the Notary has completed the following so the document does not need to be returned to you:
a) made a Statement which sufficiently describes what the Notary has done and is readable (just ‘witnessed’ or ‘notarised’ are insufficient as it is not clear what has been done), and
b) included the Name and Signature of the Notary, and
c) added the Seal/Stamp of the Notary, and
d) stated the Date & Place where the Notarial Act was done, and
e) any Underlying document(s) match what is said in the Notarial Act and it is clear the
documents were seen by the Notary. To make it clear the Notary has seen all pages of a multi-page document some Notaries will ribbon all pages and secure the ribbon with their seal. Other Notaries will initial or seal every loose page to show they have viewed each page. 

4 Post the document which has been Notarised to the Authentication Unit with the ‘Request a Document Authentication or Apostille’ application form.

Last updated 5 July 2017