*** Transcriber's Note: Please set your voice synthesiser to read most punctuation. When you encounter the caret sign (^) at the end of a line, please enter the applicable information, if necessary. ***

The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua

CHILD PAS/DRG 10/16

You will need to print and sign this form.

Application for New Zealand Citizenship by descent and passport for child (under 16 years of age)

Call these numbers if you need help.
Freephone in Australia, 1300 559 535
Freephone in New Zealand, 0800 22 51 51
From another country, +64 4 463 9361

The questions numbered 1 to 9 are about the child. 
Remember, you are filling this out for a child, so you need to use their name and details on this page.

1. What is the child’s full name?
Copy the names from the child’s birth certificate. You must provide the original state issued birth certificate with the application. If their name has been legally changed (by adoption etc.), then use the new name details from that document.
Surname or family names ^
First and middle names ^

2. Where were they born?
Copy the town, city or village and country of birth from their birth certificate.
City, town or village where they were born ^
Country where they were born ^

3. What is their date of birth? (DD/MM/YYYY) ^

4. Are they male, female or other? ^

5. What is their height and eye colour?
Remember, you are filling in this form for your child, make sure you give their height and eye colour.
Height, in centimetres ^
Eye colour, for example, Brown, Blue, Green, Grey, Hazel, Black ^

6. Is the child adopted?
If yes, you must provide all original adoption documents if you were adopted outside New Zealand.
Date of adoption (DD/MM/YYY) ^
Country of adoption ^
If no, go to 7.

7. Has their name been legally changed for any reason? This could be because they were adopted, changed their name by deed poll etc. 
If their name has not been legally changed, go to 8.
If their name has been legally changed, you must provide an official state-issued change of name document if the name change happened outside New Zealand. This document could be an adoption order or statutory declaration.
Specify how the child's name has been changed, for example, deed poll, Adoption or Other ^
If you chose other, please explain ^
What was the child's name before it was legally changed? ^

8. What is your Child’s home address and your contact details? 
This address information must be for the Child. It must be where they usually live.  If they live in more than one place, please put the details of the place they spend the most time.
Unit or house number ^
Street name ^
Suburb ^
Place name (city, town, village) ^  
State or territory ^ 
Postcode ^
Country ^

Your contact phone number ^

Your email address ^

9. What is your postal address?
This is where we will send documents and certificate. Please note that in most cases courier services cannot deliver to Post Office boxes.

If it is the same as the child’s residential address, go to 10.
If it is different from the child's residential address, state the details.
Your name ^
Unit or house number ^
Street name ^
Suburb ^
Place name (city, town, village) ^  
State or territory ^ 
Postcode ^
Country ^

The questions numbered 10 to 17 are for the New Zealand Parent.
To be the New Zealand Parent on this application, you need to have either been born in New Zealand, or received a grant of New Zealand citizenship before your child was born. If the child’s parent received their New Zealand citizenship by descent, they cannot be the ‘New Zealand Parent’ on this application.

10. Parent’s claim to New Zealand citizenship
This is where the Child’s parent provides evidence of their New Zealand citizenship.

Type yes after the statement that applies to you.
I was born in New Zealand ^
I was born in Niue, Tokelau or Cook Islands ^
If you were born in Niue, Tokelau or Cook Islands, you must provide the original birth certificate.
I was given a Grant of New Zealand citizenship ^

11. What is your relationship to the child who is claiming New Zealand citizenship by descent?

Type yes after the statement that applies to you.
Birth parent ^
Adoptive parent ^
Other (please state) ^

12. What is your full name?
Copy the names from your birth or citizenship certificate. If your name has been legally changed by marriage, civil union, adoption etc., then use the new name details from that document.

Title, for example, Mr, Mrs, Ms, Miss or Other (please specify) ^
Surname or family names ^
First and middle names ^

13. Has your name been legally changed for any reason? This could be because you got married, were adopted, changed your name by deed poll etc.
If you haven't legally changed your name, go to 14.
If you have legally changed your name, you must provide an official state-issued change of name document if your name change happened outside New Zealand. This document could be a marriage certificate or adoption order.
Specify how your name has been changed, for example, Marriage or Civil Union, Deed poll, Adoption or Other ^
If you chose other, please explain ^
What was your name before it was legally changed? ^

14. Where were you born?
Copy the town, city or village and country of birth from your birth certificate.
City, town or village where you were born ^
Country where you were born ^

15. What is your date of birth? (DD/MM/YYYY) ^

16. Are you male, female or other? ^

17. What is the number of your most recent New Zealand passport? ^

This is the end of the New Zealand Parent section. Please go to question 22, and read and sign the Privacy Act section.

The questions numbered 18 to 21 are for the applicant’s Other Parent. To complete this application form we need both parents’ details. One parent’s details must be in the ‘New Zealand Parent’ section and the other parent’s details must be in this section.

18. What is your full name?
Copy the names from your birth or citizenship certificate. If your name has been legally changed by marriage, civil union, adoption etc., then use the new name details from that document.
Title, for example, Mr, Mrs, Ms, Miss, Other (please state) ^
Surname or family names ^
First and middle names ^

19. Has your name been legally changed for any reason? This could be because you got married, were adopted, changed your name by deed poll etc.
If you haven't legally changed your name, go to 20.
If you have changed your name, specify how your name has been changed, for example, Marriage or Civil Union, Deed poll, Adoption or Other ^
If you chose other, please explain ^
What was your name before it was legally changed? ^
You must provide an official state-issued change of name document if your name change happened outside New Zealand. This document could be a marriage certificate or adoption order.

20. What is your date of birth? (DD/MM/YYYY) ^

21. What is your relationship to the child who is claiming New Zealand citizenship by descent?
Birth parent Yes or No ^
Adoptive parent Yes or No ^
Other (please state) ^

This is the end of the Other Parent’s section. Please go to question 22, and read and sign the Privacy Act information section.

22. Privacy Act information - who should read this?

The ‘New Zealand Parent’ and ‘other parent’ need to read the information in this section. Each parent then needs to write their name and sign at the bottom of the page to say that they have read and understood the information. 

Collection, authorisation and use of information in support of this application.
This application form requires you to produce certain information in support of your application. The decision to supply the information is voluntary. If you do not produce sufficient information to enable a claim to New Zealand citizenship by descent to be determined, the application will be declined. We need to collect this information to see if the requirements of the Citizenship Act 1977 are met, to process the application and for other lawful purposes. The 
information you provide in this form is collected and held by Department of Internal Affairs, PO Box 10680, Wellington, New Zealand.

Information held by the Citizenship Office and Passport Office can be used in authorised information matching programmes by the Electoral Enrolment Centre, the Department of Internal Affairs, the Inland Revenue Department, the New Zealand Transport Agency, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Social Development, and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment as authorised by statute. Details are available on the Department of Internal Affairs website – www.dia.govt.nz or call +64 4 463 9361. 

You have a right of access to and correction of personal information you have provided under the Information Privacy Principles of the Privacy Act 1993. Please contact the Citizenship Office for more details.

WARNING: It is an offence against the Passports Act 1992 to knowingly or recklessly make a statement that is false or misleading in a material particular for the purposes of gaining a New Zealand Passport. It is also an offence to knowingly or recklessly give false information or conceal any facts for the purpose of gaining New Zealand citizenship for oneself or on behalf of someone. If you do so, you may be denied/lose New Zealand citizenship, face criminal charges, or both. 

By signing below you declare the following.
The statements made in this application are to the best of my knowledge true, complete and correct.
If false information has been provided I understand that any citizenship certificate/passport issued on the basis of that information may be cancelled and the matter referred to the New Zealand Police.
I understand that information may be obtained about me to determine my child’s eligibility for this citizenship application by way of an authorised information matching programme in accordance with section 78A of the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Act 1995.
I authorise any necessary additional enquiries including the disclosure of personal information about myself or the child for the purpose of determining eligibility for this application. My authorisation includes, but is not limited to, any information held by the Department of Internal Affairs.
If I have also applied for a New Zealand passport for my child at the same time, I authorise my/the child’s information to be taken from or shared with the New Zealand Passport Office for the efficient processing of both applications.
I understand that if I have possession of a forged or false New Zealand travel document, I may be liable on conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years, a fine not exceeding NZ$250,000 or both.

23. New Zealand Parent (must sign)

I have read and understood the information above relating to the collection and use of information for this application, and I authorise the use and disclosure of my information as outlined above.
Full name ^
Signature ^ 
Date (DD/MM/YYYY) ^

24. Other Parent (must sign)

I have read and understood the information above relating to the collection and use of information for this application, and I authorise the use and disclosure of my information as outlined above.
Full name ^
Signature ^ 
Date (DD/MM/YYYY) ^

25. This is where you apply for a PASSPORT for your child.

I want to apply for a passport for my child. Yes or no ^

Only 1 parent needs to give permission in this question.
I give my consent for a passport to be issued to the child named in question 5 of this application.
I am the NZ Parent. Yes or no ^ 
I am the other Parent. Yes or no ^

The next section is for your witness. Get the person who wants to be your child's witness to complete this section.
Make sure you give your witness the 2 identical photos of your child so that they can complete the photo identity section in step 32. The photos need to be:
• Recent colour photos, less than 6 months old
• a full front, close up view of the head and shoulders with the head covering 70% to 80% of the photograph
• taken with a neutral expression (not smiling or frowning) with their mouth closed
• show the child looking straight at the camera, and your head not tilted
• show the child's eyes open and clearly visible, and no hair in their eyes
• without sunglasses. Tinted prescription glasses may be worn as long as eyes are still visible
• a true image and not altered in any way.
• clear, sharp and in focus with minimum reflective light on face. No redeye
• with a plain light coloured background (not white)
• be of good quality colour and on high quality photographic paper, with no ink marks on the image (no inkjet printers)
• passport-sized -  45mm by 35mm
• glasses frames must not obscure the eyes
• Do not trim the photos

This section numbered 26 to 33 is for the witness. Before you fill in this section, please read the statements carefully to make sure you can be a witness.
The witness must:
• not be a relative or part of the family group of the child
• not live at the same address as the child
• be aged 16 years or over
• have known the child for more than 12 months, or since birth if the child is under 12 months old.

26. Do you hold a New Zealand passport? If yes, what is your passport number? ^
Go to 29.
If no, go to 27.

27. You only need to answer this question if you do not have a New Zealand passport.

Which of the following groups describes your current job? Answer Yes next to the group that describes you.
Registered medical professional, for example, a doctor, nurse, dentist, pharmacist, physio etc ^
Teacher, primary or secondary teacher or university lecturer ^
Minister of religion ^
Lawyer ^
Police officer ^
Kaumatua ^

None of the above. Stop. If you are none of these groups, you cannot be a witness for this application.

28. Please write the name and street address of the business or organisation where you work. Remember, you only need to complete this question if you do not have a New Zealand passport.
Name of business or organisation ^
Street address of business or organisation ^

29. What is your full name?
Title, for example, Mr, Mrs, Ms, Miss, Other (please state) ^
Surname or family names ^
First and middle names ^

30. What is your date of birth? (DD/MM/YYYY) ^

31. Where do you live?
Unit or house number ^ 
Street name ^
Suburb ^
Place name, such as city, town or village ^ 
State or territory ^
Postcode ^
Country ^
Phone number ^
Email address ^

32. The Applicant will give you 2 photos. You need to write 3 things on the back of 1 of the photos:
• the full name of the child
• your signature 
• today’s date.

Do not staple, glue or paperclip photos to the application as this may cause damage. 

I declare that:
• I am 16 years of age or over.
• I have known the applicant for more than 1 year or since birth if under 12 months.
• The information I have given is complete and correct to the best of my knowledge.
• The person in this photo is the person named in question 1.
• I have written the full name of the applicant, signed my name and written the date on the back of 1 photograph. 
• I understand that if I have provided false information, this passport can be cancelled and I can, by law, be fined or imprisoned.

33. Witness declaration and Privacy Act information
If you are acting as a witness for this application, you need to read all the information in this section. Then fill out the name of the child being registered, the number of years you have known them, and then sign and date the bottom of this section. 

Collection, authorisation and use of information in support of this application.
As a witness for this application you are required to provide personal information. The decision to supply the information is voluntary. 
If you do not want to supply this information or authorise access to your personal information you cannot act as a witness.
We need to collect your information to help with processing this citizenship and passport application and for other lawful purposes. The information you provide in this form is collected and held by Department of Internal Affairs.
You have a right of access to and correction of personal information you have provided under the Information Privacy Principles of the Privacy Act 1993. 
Please contact the Citizenship Office for more details.

By signing below you declare the following:
I have known
enter child's full name ^
for  
Years enter number of years ^ or Months enter number of months ^

Signature of Witness ^
Date (DD/MM/YYYY) ^

This is the end of the Witness section.

34. Citizenship and passport application fees
Fees vary depending on which country you are sending your application to and which services you need. 

Type Yes next to the option you want.

Fees if lodged in New Zealand
Citizenship only NZD$204.40 ^
Citizenship & Passport NZD$295.70 ^
Urgent Citizenship & Passport NZD$452.23 ^
International courier fee (see our website for details) ^
Translation of documents not in English NZD$75 per part translation (see our website for details) ^

Fees if lodged in Australia
Citizenship only AUD$192.00 ^
Citizenship & Passport AUD$318.00 ^
Urgent Citizenship & Passport AUD$533.00 ^
International courier fee (see our website for details) ^
Translation of documents not in English AUD$65.00 per part translation (see our website for details) ^

Fees if lodged in the UK
Citizenship only GBP£110.00 ^
Citizenship & Passport GBP£182.00 ^
Urgent Citizenship & Passport GBP£306.00 ^
International courier fee (see our website for details) ^
Translation of documents not in English GBP£35.00 per part translation (see our website for details) ^

35. Payment details for Citizenship and passport application fees
Fees vary depending on which country you are sending your application to. Make sure you have said what services you require in question 34.

If you want to pay by credit card or Debit card, please complete the card details.
State which card it is - Visa, MasterCard or Amex ^
What is the name on the card? ^
What is the card number? ^ 
What is the expiry date? (DD/MM/YYYY) ^
What is the security code or CSC? This is the last 3 numbers on the reverse side of card ^
I authorise the Department of Internal Affairs to charge the total amount across to my credit or debit card.
Cardholder sign here ^

Do you want to pay by cheque or money order? ^
Make it out to ‘Department of Internal Affairs’ in New Zealand dollars, Australian dollars or Great British pounds, depending on which country you are sending your application to.

Do you want to pay by cash or EFTPOS in person only? ^

36. You can courier, post or deliver in person to the following addresses.

New Zealand
Courier or post to:
The Citizenship (Descent) Office
Service Delivery and Operations
Department of Internal Affairs
PO Box 10680
Wellington 6143
New Zealand

Hand deliver in AUCKLAND to:
New Zealand Citizenship Office
Level 6, AA Building
99 Albert Street 
Auckland
Hours: Monday to Friday 8:30am to 5:00pm, except Wednesday 9:00am to 5:00pm

Hand deliver in MANUKAU to:
New Zealand Citizenship Office
Level 1
20 Lambie Drive
Manukau City
Hours: Monday to Friday 8:30am to 5:00pm, except Wednesday 9:00am to 5:00pm

Hand deliver in WELLINGTON to:
New Zealand Citizenship Office
National Library
Lower Ground Level
70 Molesworth Street
Wellington
Hours: Monday to Friday 8:30am to 5:00pm, except Wednesday 9:00am to 5:00pm

Hand deliver in CHRISTCHURCH to:
New Zealand Citizenship Office
120 Hereford Street
Christchurch
Hours: Monday to Friday 8:30am to 5:00pm, except Wednesday 9:00am to 5:00pm

Phone: +64 4 463 9361 (outside New Zealand)
Frephone: 0800 22 51 51 (New Zealand only)
Fax: +64 4 382 3561

Telephone Contact Centre Opening hours
Monday to Thursday 8am to 7pm
Friday 9am to 7pm
Saturday 9am to 2pm
Email: citizenship@dia.govt.nz
Website: www.citizenship.govt.nz

Australia
For courier, Express Post, Standard Mail or Registered Mail, address to:
Department of Internal Affairs
GPO Box 365
Sydney NSW 2001 
Australia

For hand delivery, Courier or Platinum Express Post in SYDNEY, address to:
New Zealand Citizenship Office
Level 22
20 Bond Street
Sydney NSW 2000
Australia
Hours: Monday to Friday 9:00am to 4:00pm, except Wednesday 9:30am to 4:00pm

Phone: +61 2 9225 2300 (outside Australia)
Freephone: 1300 559 535 (Australia only)
Fax: +61 2 9223 0223
Email: citizenship@dia.govt.nz
Website: www.citizenship.govt.nz

United Kingdom
Courier or post to:
Department of Internal Affairs
New Zealand House
80 Haymarket
London SW1Y 4TQ
United Kingdom

Hand deliver in LONDON using the secure green drop box located on the ground floor at:
New Zealand Citizenship Office
Department of Internal Affairs
New Zealand House
80 Haymarket
London SW1Y 4TQ
Hours: Monday to Friday 10:00am to 3:00pm

Phone: +44 20 7968 2730 (UK only)
Fax: +44 20 7968 2739
Email: london@dia.govt.nz
Website: www.citizenship.govt.nz