*** Transcriber's Note: Please set your voice synthesiser to read most punctuation. When you encounter the caret sign (^) at the end of a line, please enter the applicable information, if necessary. ***

Application for New Zealand Citizenship for Adult
Raraunga Aotearoa - Pakeke

You will need to print and sign this form. Digital signatures are not allowed.

Use this form if you are 16 years or over and are applying for a grant of New Zealand citizenship.

Any extra information (guide notes) is included with the questions in this form.

Contact 0800 22 51 51 (New Zealand only) if you need help.

1. What is your full name?
Enter your title. Choose from Mr, Mrs, Ms, Miss, or Other (Please specify) ^
First and middle names ^
Surname or family name ^


2. Are you male or female? ^


3. What is your date of birth? DD/MM/YYYY ^
You will need to bring or send your original birth certificate with your application.
 
If the birth document is not in English, it will need to be translated. You can get the documents translated by a translation agency in New Zealand or get the Citizenship Office to organise the translation for you. Or you can get the documents translated by a government agency or court in the country that issued the documents.


4. Where were you born?
City, town or village where you were born ^
Country where you were born ^


5. What country or countries are you currently a citizen of? ^


6. Other citizenships.
If you have been a citizen of any country other than the ones you listed in question 5, for example, Tonga, Fiji, please enter them ^


7. Applying for the first time? Yes or no ^

8. In the last 5 years, what passports / travel documents have you had? 

Remember, if you have the original passports, you need to include them with your application. Include all expired passports / travel documents for all countries.
Passport or travel document number ^
Which country is this passport or travel document from? ^


9. Do you have a current New Zealand driver licence? Yes or no ^
If you said yes, enter your driver licence number ^


10. Have you ever been married or joined in a civil union? Yes or no ^
If you said yes, you are or have been married, in a civil union, divorced or widowed. Go to question 11. 
If you said no, go to question 12. 

11. How many times have you been married or in a civil union? 
Enter the number here ^
Enter the first and last names of your wife / husband / civil union partner and the year of each marriage/civil union ^

You will need to provide all the original documents of each marriage, divorce, or civil union with this form.

12. Have you ever used any other names or family names? Yes or no ^
Include all other names you are known as, or have been known as. For example: 
• maiden names 
• married names
• official changes of name 
• adoptive names
• English names 
• names used at school or work 
• kunya names
• any other names you have used.

For each different name, enter your first name(s), surname or family name, the reason you used this name, and the years you used it ^
If you have officially changed your name, at any time, you will need to provide us with proof of this name change. 
If the other names you have used are not on any official documents you must list them on the form, but you don’t need to provide proof of them.

Parents' details
Mother or father means your birth or legal adoptive mother, father or parents.
Don't include step-parents, customary adoptions or parents who do not have legal guardianship.

13. Your mother’s details
Mother’s first and middle names. Please complete these details, even if your mother has died ^
Mother’s surname or family name ^
Mother’s citizenship(s)^


14. Your father's details
Father’s first and middle names. Please complete these details, even if your father has died ^
Father’s surname or family name ^
Father’s citizenship(s)^


15. Where do you live?
If you move or change address while your application is processing, please let your citizenship case officer know.

Street number or flat number ^
Street name ^
Suburb ^ 
Postcode^ 
Town / city ^

Contact information
Email address ^
Home phone ^ 
Mobile phone ^


16. What is your postal address?
This is where we will send your documents, papers and letters. 

Do you want them sent where you live? Yes or No ^

If you said yes, go to question 17.
If you said no, enter another address.

Business or agent’s name (if required) ^
Street number  or PO Box number ^
Street name ^
Suburb ^ 
Postcode ^
Town / city ^


17. Where have you lived in the last 5 years?
This should include places you have lived in New Zealand and overseas.

For each place you have lived, enter the street number and name, town / city, country, and the years you lived there. ^


18. If you are granted citizenship, do you intend to travel outside New Zealand in the next 12 months?  Yes or No ^
Include trips you have planned, explain why you are going, for example: holiday, work, study, to live. 

If you said yes, enter the date you are leaving New Zealand, why you are going, and how long you are going for ^


19. Is English your first language?   Yes or No ^
If you said yes, go to question 21.


20. Can you have a conversation about a lot of everyday things in English?   Yes or No ^
You need to prove you can speak English in everyday situations. You should send at least 1 of the original following 
documents with your application if lodged by post:
• proof of English study at a New Zealand school, polytechnic or university 
• a signed letter from a past or current employer (who has English as a first language)
• an IELTS certificate
• other school reports, exam results, etc

If you can’t provide enough proof, you may need to attend an English language interview.


Everyone needs to answer all of these questions.

21. Have you ever been convicted or found guilty of any offence against the law of New Zealand or any other country? Yes or No ^
Include convictions even if you have paid the fines or served sentences for them. You do not need to include any information that is covered by the Criminal Records (Clean Slate) Act 2004. 

If you said yes, you need to include a letter with the details of what happened. The letter needs to include the date, place and what happened. 

22. Have you ever committed any offence against the law of New Zealand or any other country for which you have not yet been convicted?  Yes or No ^

If you said yes, you need to include a letter with the details of what happened. The letter needs to include the date, place and what happened.


23. Have you ever had a protection order issued against you?  Yes or No ^
If you said yes, you need to include a copy of the order.

24. Are you being, or have you been, investigated or reviewed or has any other legal action been taken against you by any of these agencies in New Zealand or any other country?
It is an offence against the Citizenship Act 1977 to give information that is false or misleading. If it is later found that you have provided false or misleading information, you may be denied or lose New Zealand citizenship, or you could face criminal charges, or both.

Answer Yes next to any agency that applies, and include a letter with details of what happened.
Police ^
Customs ^
Immigration New Zealand ^
NZ Transport Agency ^
Department of Internal Affairs ^
Passport Issuing Authority ^
Work and Income, Ministry of Social Development (WINZ) ^
Inland Revenue (IRD) ^
Ministry of Justice ^
Other government or enforcement agencies ^
Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) ^


25. Have you ever had to return money to any Government agency? (e.g. WINZ, IRD)   Yes or No ^
If you said no, go to question 27.

26. Have you paid this money back or do you have a payment plan in place? Yes or No ^
You will need to include documents showing the details of your payment plan, or a statement from the government  department or agency saying you have repaid the debt in full.

If you said yes,  enter the dollar amount you have / had to return, the reason you had to return the money and the year you paid it off (if applicable) ^


27. Have you ever given any false information to Immigration New Zealand?  Yes or No ^
If you said yes, you need to include a letter with a detailed explanation.


28. Have you ever been involved in any activity that may have contributed to terrorism?  Yes or No ^
If you do not regard something as an act of terrorism but you know that others may, you should mention it.

If you said yes, you need to include a letter with a detailed explanation including what your involvement was, what the act of terrorism was, when it happened, and what organisation or group was responsible for carrying out the activity.


29. Have you ever been involved in the making or use of weapons such as biological, chemical, nuclear or radiological weapons? Yes or No ^
If you said yes, you need to include a letter with a detailed explanation including what your involvement was, the reasons for your involvement, what kind of weapons they were, when it happened and what country it happened in..


30. Have you ever committed a war crime or a crime against humanity?  Yes or No ^
If you said yes, you need to include a letter with a detailed explanation, including what happened, who was involved, where it happened and what the outcome was.

31. 
During the ceremony you will read aloud a statement that says you will be loyal to New Zealand.

You need to choose which statement you will say. You have a choice of 2 statements - either an oath or an affirmation.
The oath of allegiance is religious, and includes the words ‘so help me God’.
The affirmation of allegiance is non-religious and does not include the words ‘so help me God’.

Do you want to say the oath or the affirmation? ^


32. If any of your family members are also applying for New Zealand citizenship would you like to go to a ceremony with them? Yes or No ^


33. Do you need any special assistance so that you can attend an interview or public ceremony? Yes or No ^
This could include needing access for a wheelchair, you can't use stairs at a venue, or you need help if you are hearing impaired. 
If you said yes, what help do you need? ^


34.  Is there anything else we should know that might affect your application?
Some examples are: 
• If you are planning to retire soon to another country
• if you have ever used a different date of birth
• if you have ever been deported from New Zealand or any other country
• if you have an outstanding warrant for your arrest in another country, or 
• anything else we should know.

If there's anything else we should know, enter it here ^


35. Did someone translate this form for you or help you interpret this form? Yes or No ^
This is a legal declaration, so the person translating needs to read it carefully before they fill it in and sign it. The person assisting you in interpreting / translating the form must be over 16 years old. 

I, [enter your name] ^ 
of [enter your address] ^
declare that I assisted the applicant to complete this application. I confirm that I truly and faithfully interpreted and translated all applicable questions in the application form, together with the answers given by the applicant and all other things that I have been required to interpret and translate. I also confirm that I explained the Responsibilities and Privileges of New Zealand citizenship and that the applicant has acknowledged an understanding of them.

Their signature ^
Date signed (DD/MM/YYYY) ^


36. Applicant Declaration

Warning: It is an offence against the Citizenship Act 1977 to knowingly or recklessly give false information or conceal any facts for the purpose of gaining New Zealand citizenship for oneself or on behalf of someone. If you do so, you may be denied / lose New Zealand citizenship, or face criminal charges, or both. 

• I understand this application and warning.
• The documents provided for this application are genuine and unaltered.
• I understand that becoming a New Zealand citizen may affect my present citizenship.
• I confirm that I understand the responsibilities and privileges of New Zealand citizenship.

Responsibilities: things that I must do
1. Obey and promote the laws of New Zealand. 
2. Not to act in a way that is against the interests of New Zealand.
3. Register to vote.
4. Pay tax.
5. Behave as a responsible New Zealander.

Privileges: things that citizenship lets me do
1. Have the right to live in New Zealand indefinitely.
2. Travel overseas and return to New Zealand on a New Zealand passport. 
3. Stand for Parliament or local government.
4. Have full access to education.
5. Have full access to economic rights.
6. Represent New Zealand in many international sports.

• I confirm that I have read and understood the application guide notes, including the section relating to the Privacy Statement.
• Unless I have stated otherwise in this application I intend, if granted New Zealand citizenship, to continue to reside in New Zealand.
• If there is any change in my circumstances which affects the answers I have given in this application, I will send written advice to the Department of Internal Affairs up until the point I have received my citizenship certificate.
• I understand that if I do not provide sufficient information to enable a claim to New Zealand citizenship, my application may be declined. 
• I authorise the release by any Government agency of personal information which may assist the Minister of Internal Affairs to decide whether I qualify for the grant of citizenship. I recognise that this information may be provided by agencies including, but not limited to: New Zealand Police, Inland Revenue, New Zealand Customs Service, Immigration New Zealand, Ministry of Social Development, Passport Office, Births, Deaths and Marriages Registry, Ministry of Justice.
• I authorise the Department of Internal Affairs to release my name and address to my local Member of Parliament and local councillors so that they can formally welcome me to New Zealand following my grant of citizenship.

I declare that the information I have given in this application is, to the best of my knowledge, true, complete and correct.

This application must be received by the Department of Internal Affairs within 3 months of being signed and dated.

 Signature of applicant ^
Date signed (DD/MM/YYYY) ^



37.  Witness section 
The witness must fill in this section in their own handwriting and write your full name on the back of 1 photo, sign and date the back of the photo.

Photo information
You need to give 2 identical colour photos that are less than 6 months old, and meet the listed requirements. We strongly recommend that you obtain your photos from a business that provides a passport photo service, as the business will help ensure that your photos meet our requirements. Photos that do not meet our requirements will not be accepted.

To help you to avoid some of the most common problems with photo quality, we have summarised the main requirements. If you need more detailed information about photos, call us on 0800 22 51 51. 
• 2 identical colour photos, less than 6 months old.
• Be a full front, close up view of the head and shoulders with the head covering 70% to 80% of the photograph.
• Be taken with a neutral expression (not smiling or frowning) with mouth closed. 
• Show you looking straight at the camera, and their head not tilted. 
• Show your eyes open and clearly visible, and no hair in their eyes.
• Without sunglasses. Tinted prescription glasses may be worn as long as eyes are still visible.
• A true image and not altered in any way.
• Clear, sharp and in focus with minimum reflective light on face. 
• No redeye.
• With a plain light coloured background (not white).
• Be of good quality colour and on high quality photographic paper, with no ink marks on the image (no inkjet printers).
• Passport-sized (45mm by 35mm).
• Glasses frames must not obscure the eyes.
• Do not trim the photos.

Who can be your witness?
A witness needs to hold a valid New Zealand passport or be an Internal Affairs representative. Type yes after the one that applies to you.
I am a Citizenship Case Officer or DIA Customer Services Officer ^
I hold a valid New Zealand Passport and the applicant is not related to me and we do not live at the same address ^

Type your New Zealand Passport number ^
How many years you have known the applicant? Years ^ 

Type your name
Surname or family name ^
First and middle names ^
Type your date of birth (DD/MM/YYYY) ^
Type your address and contact details 
Unit or house number ^ 
Street name ^
Suburb ^
City or town ^ 
Post code ^
State ^
Country ^
Home phone ^
Daytime phone ^

New Zealand passport holder declaration
I declare that:
• I am 16 years of age or over.
• I have known the child for more than 1 year.
• The information I have given is complete and correct to the best of my knowledge.
• The person in this photo is the person applying for citizenship.
• I have written the full name of the applicant, signed my name and written the date on the back of 1 photograph. 
• I understand that if I have provided false information, I can, by law, be fined or imprisoned. 

Please check carefully. Have you written the 3 things on the back of one of the photos correctly?
Do not staple, glue or paperclip photos to the application as this may cause damage. Ensure your photo has been correctly witnessed to avoid delays in processing.

Signature of witness ^
Date signed (DD/MM/YYYY) ^


38. Checklist

Before you bring or send us your application, please make sure you have everything you need. If you don't provide all the original documents that you need to, your application will be delayed. 
All original documents will be returned to you by courier or at an interview.

Don't bring or send photocopies. 

Everyone needs to bring or send with their application:
•	adult’s or child’s full birth certificate, or equivalent
•	if you are adopted, adoption papers (Order of Adoption, pre-adoptive, and post-adoptive birth certificates)
•	current passport(s) / travel documents or equivalent (or most recent if it has expired)
•	if you are aged under 16 years, both parents’ passports
•	2 passport photos (less than 6 months old), certified by a witness
•	the application fee ($470.20 per adult, $235.10 per child).

Depending on your answers to previous questions, you may need to include documents showing:

•	proof you were in New Zealand on 14 September 1982
•	all your marriage / civil union / divorce / name change documents, and
•	anything else we should know that might affect your application.

If your documents aren't in English
If any documents are not in English, you must either:

• pay us a translation fee of $75 per document if you wish the Department of Internal Affairs to translate the key information in your documents, or
• include an authorised translation (with the original document).

You can have your documents translated by 1 of the following:

• the Department of Internal Affairs; or
• an authorised translation agency (for a list of authorised agencies please see our website or contact us); or
• the issuing Government agency; or
• a court in the country of origin, provided they have been authenticated by that country’s diplomatic post in New Zealand.

Don’t provide translations done by family members or friends. 

You might also need to include:

•	authorised translations, if your documents are not in English
•	a translation fee if you wish the Department of Internal Affairs to translate your documents.

If you are unable to give us these documents, you will need to explain why here, or you could include a letter with your application. ^


39. If you want someone else to talk to us on your behalf, you will need to include a signed letter that provides the following information:
1. The person’s name or company name.
2. Their postal address.
3. Their contact phone number, email address or cell phone number.

Representatives can be any person you choose, e.g. a family member, a friend, an immigration agent. 
We will only contact your representative and all your documents will be sent to them.


40. Contact with the Citizenship Office
If you change your address or travel overseas while we are processing your application, you must tell us. If the Citizenship 
Office is unable to contact you because you have moved or are overseas, or you do not respond, your application will be 
presented to the Minister of Internal Affairs for a decision based on the information available. 

Citizenship Office contact details
Freephone: 0800 22 51 51 (New Zealand only) 
Phone: (+64 4) 463 9361 (outside New Zealand)
Email: citizenship@dia.govt.nz 
Website: www.govt.nz/citizenship
Postal address: 
Department of Internal Affairs 
PO Box 10680
Wellington, 6143


41. Lodging your application and documents

By appointment.
You can make an appointment to come to 1 of our offices. At the office you will meet a citizenship case officer 
who will:
• Help you complete the form, including acting as a witness and certifying your photographs. If applying for your child who is under 16, please ensure they are with you at the appointment if you need the citizenship officer to act as a witness.
• Assess your eligibility before you pay the fee.
• Photocopy and give back your documents.

We offer appointments in Whangarei, Auckland, Manukau, Hamilton, Rotorua, Tauranga, Palmerston North, Napier, New Plymouth, Wellington, Nelson, Christchurch, Queenstown and Dunedin. Please call us freephone on 0800 22 51 51 to make an appointment.

By post.
If you want to post us your application, we advise you to use a ‘track and trace’ courier bag from New Zealand Post 
(within New Zealand) or registered mail (from overseas) to keep track of the original documents. We will send your documents back to you by courier.

Post your application to: 
Department of Internal Affairs 
PO Box 10680
Wellington 614341


42. Fees and payment
We cannot start processing your application until you have paid your application fee.

Are you making the payment for your application? Answer yes next to the option that applies to you.
No. My payment is being made by another applicant ^
Yes. I am making the payment for my application on this form ^

What is the total amount you need to pay? It costs $470.20 for each adult and $235.10 for each child and $75.00 for each translation you are getting the Citizenship Office to organise for you.
Total amount you need to pay ^

How would you like to pay? Answer yes next to the payment method you want to use.
Cheque or bank draft made payable to Department of Internal Affairs ^
Money order ^
Cash or Eftpos if you are applying in person ^
Credit card ^
Card number ^
Card expiry date (MM/YY) ^
Full name of cardholder ^
I authorise the Department of Internal Affairs to charge the total amount above to my credit or debit card.
Cardholder’s signature ^
(I authorise the Department of Internal Affairs to charge the total amount above to my credit or debit card.)

If you choose to withdraw your application, you may be eligible for a partial refund of $158.40. Part of the fee is kept to cover the costs of the initial processing of your application.
