*** Transcriber's Note: Please set your voice synthesiser to read most punctuation. When you encounter the caret sign (^) at the end of a line, please enter the applicable information, if necessary. ***

The Department of Internal Affairs Te Tari Taiwhenua

Application for New Zealand Citizenship for Child (under 16 years) Raraunga Aotearoa - Taiohi

You will need to print and sign this form.

Use this form if you are applying for a grant of New Zealand citizenship for a child who is under 16 years of age.
Both parents must give their consent before New Zealand citizenship can be granted to a child.

Any extra information (guide notes) is included with the questions in this form.

Contact 0800 22 51 51 (New Zealand only) if you need help.


1. What is your child’s full name?
Title. Choose from Mr, Ms, Miss or Master ^
First and middle names ^
Surname or family name ^

2. Is your child male or female? ^
You will need to bring or send your child’s original birth document with this application.

3. What is your child’s date of birth? (DD/MM/YYYY) ^
If the birth document is not in English, it will need to be translated. You can get the documents translated by a translation agency in New Zealand or get the Citizenship Office to organise the translation for you. Or you can get the documents translated by a government agency or court in the country that issued the documents.

4. Where was your child born?
City, town or village where your child was born ^
Country where your child was born ^

5. Which country or countries is your child currently a citizen of? ^
If your child is registered as a New Zealand citizen by descent, send us their original citizenship certificate.

6. Apart from the ones you listed in question 5, has your child been a citizen of any other country?
If no, go to 7.
If yes, state the country or countries ^
Please note that New Zealand allows dual citizenship.

7. Is this the first time your child has applied for New Zealand citizenship? Yes or no ^

8. In the last 5 years, what passports or travel documents has your child had? 
Include all expired passports or travel documents for all countries or where the child has been endorsed on a parent's passport. If you have the original passports, you need to include them and both parents’ passports with this application. 
Passport or travel document number ^
Which country is this passport or travel document from? ^

9. People use different names for all sorts of reasons. Has your child used any other names during their life?
Include all other names your child is known as, or has been known as. For example: 
• official changes of name 
• names used at school or work 
• family names 
• English names
• adoptive names
• any other names they have used.
If your child has officially changed their name at any time, you will need to provide us with proof of this name change. If the other names your child uses are not on any official documents, you must list them on the form but you do not need to provide proof of them.

If your child has not used any other names, go to 10.
If yes, state your child’s other names.
First names ^
Surname or family name ^
Why did your child use this name? ^
When did your child use this name? For example, 2005 to 2009 ^

10. Now some questions about the child’s parents. 
When we say mother or father we mean birth or legal adoptive mother, father or parents. Do not include step-parents or parents who do not have legal guardianship.
Both parents or legal guardians need to include their passports with this application.
Please complete this information, even if the child’s parent has died.

Mother's details
Mother’s first and middle names ^
Mother’s surname or family name ^
Mother’s citizenships ^

11. Details for father or other parent
Father’s first and middle names ^
Father’s surname or family name ^
Father’s citizenships ^

12. Where does your child live?
Street number ^
Flat number ^
Street name ^
Suburb ^
Postcode ^
Town or city ^
Email address of parent ^
Home phone ^ 
Mobile phone of parent ^

13. What is your child’s postal address?
This is where we will send your child’s documents, papers and letters.
Is your child's postal address the same as the address in question 12.
If yes, go to 14.
If no, type the address you want your child’s documents sent to.
Business or Agent’s Name if required ^
Street number ^
PO Box number ^
Street name ^
Suburb ^ 
Postcode ^
Town or city ^

14. If your child is granted citizenship, do they intend to travel outside New Zealand in the next 12 months?
If no, go to 15.
If yes, type the date they are leaving New Zealand, why they are going, for example, holiday, work, study or to live, and how long they are going for ^

15. Is your child aged 14 years or older?
If yes, go to 16.
If no, go to 26.

16. Is English your child’s first language?
If yes, go to 18.
If no, go to 17.

17. Can your child have a conversation about a lot of everyday things in English?
If no, go to 18.
If yes, you need to prove your child can speak English in everyday situations. If your child is with you when you ldoge their application in person, you do not need to provide documented proof that your child can speak English. If you are posting their application form, you should send an original school report or exam result with the application form showing proof of English study. If you can’t provide enough proof, your child may need to attend an English language interview.

18. Remember, if your child is aged 14 years or older, all these questions need to be answered.
Has your child ever been convicted or found guilty of any offence against the law of New Zealand or any other country? Include convictions even if your child has paid the fines or served sentences for them. You do not need to include any information that is covered by the Criminal Records (Clean Slate) Act 2004.
If no, go to 19.
If yes, you need to include a letter with the details of what happened. The letter needs to include the date, place and what happened. Then go to 19.

19. Has your child ever committed any offence against the law of New Zealand or any other country for which they have not yet been convicted?
If no, go to 20.
If yes, you need to include a letter with the details of what happened. Then go to 20.

20. Is your child being, or has your child been, investigated or reviewed or has any other legal action been taken against them by any of these agencies in New Zealand or any other country?
It is an offence against the Citizenship Act 1977 to give information that is false or misleading. If it is later found that you have provided false or misleading information, the child may be denied or lose New Zealand citizenship, or you could face criminal charges, or both.

Answer Yes next to any agency that applies, and include a letter with details of what happened.
Police ^
Customs ^
Immigration New Zealand ^
NZ Transport Agency ^
Department of Internal Affairs ^
Passport Issuing Authority ^
Work and Income, Ministry of Social Development (WINZ) ^
Inland Revenue (IRD) ^
Ministry of Justice ^
Other government or enforcement agencies ^
Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) ^

21. Have you ever given any false information to Immigration New Zealand about your child?
If no, go to 22.
If yes, you need to include a letter with a detailed explanation. Then go to 22.

22. Has your child ever been involved in any activity that may have contributed to terrorism? If you do not regard something as an act of terrorism but you know that others may, you should mention it.
If no, go to 23.
If yes, you need to include a letter with a detailed explanation, including what your child's involvement was, what the act of terrorism was, when it happened, and what organisation or group was responsible for carrying out the activity. Then go to 23.

23. Has your child ever been involved in the making or use of weapons such as biological, chemical, nuclear or radiological weapons?
If no, go to 24.
If yes, you need to include a letter with a detailed explanation, including what your child's involvement was, the reasons for your child's involvement, what kind of weapons they were, when it happened and what country it happened in. Then go to 24.

24. Has your child ever committed a war crime or a crime against humanity?
If no, go to 25.
If yes, you need to include a letter with a detailed explanation, including what happened, who was involved, where it happened and what the outcome was. Then go to 25.

The next few questions ask about the citizenship ceremony.

25. If your child is aged 14 years or older, they must attend a public ceremony to get citizenship. During the ceremony, they will read aloud a statement that says they will be loyal to New Zealand. Write yes next to the statement they choose to say.
A religious statement with the words ‘so help me God’ - called an Oath ^
A statement not using the words ‘so help me God’ - called an Affirmation ^

26. If any of the child’s family members are also applying for New Zealand citizenship, would you like your child to go to a ceremony with family? Yes or no ^
 Children under 14 are welcome to attend a ceremony, but this is not a requirement. Their certificates can be sent to you in the mail.

27. Does your child require any special assistance so that they can attend an interview or public ceremony? This could include needing access for a wheelchair, or help if your child is hearing impaired etc.
If no, go to 28.
If yes, type the details here ^

28. Is there anything else we should know that might affect your child’s application? Some examples are if you’re planning on moving your child to another country, if your child has ever used a different date of birth, if your child has ever been deported from New Zealand or any other country, if your child has an outstanding warrant for their arrest in another country, or anything else we should know.
If no, go to 29.
If yes, type the details here ^

29. Parents’ consent and declaration. Both parents or legal guardians must read, complete and sign this section for the child. The parent who filled in the application signs as ‘Parent 1’.
Warning: It is an offence against the Citizenship Act 1977 to knowingly or recklessly give false information or conceal any facts for the purpose of gaining New Zealand citizenship for oneself or on behalf of someone. If you do so, your child may be denied or lose their New Zealand citizenship, or you could face criminal charges, or both.

• I understand this application and warning.
• The documents provided for this application are genuine and unaltered.
• I confirm that, if my child is 14 years and over, or turns 14 at the time their application reaches the Minister of Internal Affairs for a decision, my child understands the responsibilities and privileges of New Zealand citizenship.
Responsibilities: things that my child must do
1. Obey and promote the laws of New Zealand. 
2. Not to act in a way that is against the interests of New Zealand.
3. Register to vote.
4. Pay tax.
5. Behave as a responsible New Zealander.
Privileges: things that citizenship lets my child do
1. Have the right to live in New Zealand indefinitely.
2. Travel overseas and return to New Zealand on a New Zealand passport. 
3. Stand for Parliament or local government.
4. Have full access to education.
5. Have full access to economic rights.
6. Represent New Zealand in many international sports.

Your Child’s Privacy
The information we ask for in the application form is needed to see if your child meets the requirements for citizenship, to process your child’s application, and for other lawful purposes to do with becoming a New Zealander. You don’t have to give us any information that you don’t want to. However, if we don’t have enough information to determine whether your child can become a New Zealand citizen, their application may not be approved. The information you give us in the form is collected and held by the Department of Internal Affairs, PO Box 10680, Wellington, New Zealand.
You have a right to access your information and you can ask for it to be corrected if necessary under the Information Privacy Principles of the Privacy Act 1993. If a correction is not made, your request and our response will be put in your file.
Information held by the Citizenship Office can be used in authorised matching programmes. You can find the current list of agencies that can receive information from the Citizenship Office on our website at www.dia.govt.nz.

• I confirm that I have read and understood the guide notes, including the section relating to the Privacy Statement. 
• Unless I have stated otherwise in this application, my child intends, if granted New Zealand citizenship, to continue to reside in New Zealand. 
• If there is any change in my circumstances or my child’s circumstances which affects the answers given in this application, I will send written advice to the Department of Internal Affairs up until the point my child has received their citizenship certificate.
• I understand that if I do not provide sufficient information to enable a claim to New Zealand citizenship, my child’s application may not be approved. 
• I authorise the release by any government agency of personal information about me or my child which may assist the Minister of Internal Affairs to decide whether my child qualifies for the grant of citizenship. I recognise that this information may be provided by agencies including, but not limited to, New Zealand Police, Inland Revenue, New Zealand Customs Service, Immigration New Zealand, Ministry of Social Development, Passport Office, Births, Deaths and Marriages Registry, Ministry of Justice.
• I authorise the Department to release my child’s name and address to his or her local Member of Parliament and local councillors so that they can formally welcome my child to New Zealand following his or her grant of citizenship.

If only 1 parent or legal guardian is consenting, this parent should have sole legal guardianship. We will require a court order that specifically refers to sole legal guardianship.
Both parents or guardians must include their passports with their child’s application.

Consent statement
This consent section has been filled out by me as a parent or legal guardian. 
I consent to my child becoming a New Zealand citizen. I am aware that a grant of New Zealand citizenship may affect my child’s present citizenship. I authorise the Department of Internal Affairs to make enquiries about my child’s character, and the New Zealand Police to give the Department of Internal Affairs any information about convictions or infringements relating to my child.

Parent or guardian number 1 - signing declaration and consent. 
I declare that the information I have given in this application is, to the best of my knowledge, true, complete and correct. 
Full name ^
Relationship to child ^
Signature of parent 1 ^
Date signed (DD/MM/YYYY) ^

Parent or guardian number 2 - signing consent.
Full name ^
Relationship to child ^
Signature of parent 2 ^
Date signed (DD/MM/YYYY) ^

30. Witness section
The witness must fill in this section in their own handwriting and write your child's name on the back of 1 photo and sign and date the back of the photo.

Photo information
You need to give 2 identical colour photos that are less than 6 months old, and meet the listed requirements. We strongly recommend that you obtain your child’s photos from a business that provides a passport photo service, as the business will help ensure that your child’s photos meet our requirements. Photos that do not meet our requirements will not be accepted.

To help you to avoid some of the most common problems with photo quality, we have summarised the main requirements. If you need more detailed information about photos, go online to www.govt.nz/citizenship/ or call us on 0800 22 51 51. 
• 2 identical colour photos, less than 6 months old.
• Be a full front, close up view of the head and shoulders with the head covering 70% to 80% of the photograph.
• Be taken with a neutral expression (not smiling or frowning) with mouth closed. 
• Show your child looking straight at the camera, and their head not tilted. 
• Show your child’s eyes open and clearly visible, and no hair in their eyes.
• Without sunglasses. Tinted prescription glasses may be worn as long as eyes are still visible.
• A true image and not altered in any way.
• Clear, sharp and in focus with minimum reflective light on face. 
• No redeye.
• With a plain light coloured background (not white).
• Be of good quality colour and on high quality photographic paper, with no ink marks on the image (no inkjet printers).
• Passport-sized (45mm by 35mm).
• Glasses frames must not obscure the eyes.
• Do not trim the photos.

Do not staple, glue or paperclip photos to the application as this may cause damage.

The witness needs to fill in this part of the form.

A witness needs to hold a valid New Zealand passport or be an Internal Affairs representative. Type yes after the 1 that applies to you.
I am a Citizenship Case Officer or DIA Customer Services Officer ^
I hold a valid New Zealand Passport AND the applicant is not related to me AND we do not live at the same address ^

Your New Zealand Passport number ^
How many years you have known the child? Years ^ or months if child is less than 1 year old ^

Your name
Surname or family name ^
First and middle names ^
Your date of birth (DD/MM/YYYY) ^
Your address and contact details 
Unit or house number ^ 
Street name ^
Suburb ^
City or town ^ 
Post code ^
State ^
Country ^
Home phone ^
Daytime phone ^

New Zealand passport holder declaration
I declare that:
• I am 16 years of age or over.
• I have known the child for more than 1 year or since birth if under 1 year old.
• The information I have given is complete and correct to the best of my knowledge.
• The person in this photo is the person applying for citizenship.
• I have written the full name of the child, signed my name and written the date on the back of 1 photograph. 
• I understand that if I have provided false information, I can, by law, be fined or imprisoned. 

Signature of witness ^
Date signed (DD/MM/YYYY) ^

31. Checklist
Before you bring or send us your child’s application, please make sure you have everything you need. If you don't provide all the original documents that you need to, your child’s application will be delayed. All original documents will be returned to you at the interview or by courier. Do not bring or send photocopies.

Every child needs to bring or send these with their application:
• child’s full birth certificate including details of both parents, or equivalent
• current passports, travel documents or equivalent, or the most recent if it has expired
• both parents’ passports
• 2 passport photos that are less than 6 months old, certified by a valid witness
• the application fee of $235.10 per child.

If your child has used any other names during their life, you will also need to include your child’s name change documents or proof of other name use.

If your child is aged 14 years or older, you may also need to bring or send these documents:
• if English is not your child’s first language, proof of their ability to speak English if you lodged their application by post
• offences, legal action, a letter of explanation for each
• a letter of explanation for questions 21 to 24
• anything else we should know that might affect your child’s application.

You may also need to bring or send:
• translations, if your documents are not in English
• a translation fee if you wish the Department of Internal Affairs to translate your documents.

If you are unable to give us these documents, you will need to explain why or you could include a letter with your application ^

32. If you want someone else to talk to us on your child’s behalf, you will need to include a signed letter giving your consent and telling us the following information:
• The person’s name or company name
• Their postal address
• Their contact phone number, email address or cell phone number.

Representatives can be any person you choose, for example, a family member, a friend or an immigration agent. We will only contact your representative and all your documents will be sent to them.

33. How to contact us
If you change your address or travel overseas while we are processing your child’s application, you must tell us. If the Citizenship Office is unable to contact you because you have moved or are overseas, or you do not respond, your child’s application will be presented to the Minister of Internal Affairs for a decision based on the information available. 

Freephone in New Zealand only on 0800 22 51 51
Phone from outside New Zealand on +64 4 463 9361
Post to Department of Internal Affairs 
PO Box 10680 
Wellington 6143
Email: citizenship@dia.govt.nz
Website: www.govt.nz/citizenship

34. Lodging your application and documents.

By appointment
You can make an appointment to come to one of our offices. At the office you will meet a citizenship case officer who will:
• help you complete the form, including acting as a witness and certifying your photographs
• assess your eligibility before you pay the fee
• photocopy and give back your documents.
We offer appointments in Whangarei, Auckland, Manukau, Hamilton, Rotorua, Tauranga, Palmerston North, Napier, New Plymouth, Wellington, Nelson, Christchurch, Queenstown and Dunedin. Please call us freephone on 0800 22 51 51 to make an appointment.

By post
If you want to post us your child’s application, we advise you to use a ‘track and trace’ courier bag from New Zealand Post (within New Zealand) or registered mail (from overseas) to keep track of your original documents. We will return your documents to you by courier.
Post your application and documents to:
Department of Internal Affairs
PO Box 10680
Wellington 6143

35. Application fees and payment. We cannot start processing your application until you have paid your application fee.

Are you making the payment for your child’s application on this form? Answer yes next to the option that applies to you.
My child’s payment is being made by another applicant ^
I am making the payment for my child's application on this form ^

What is the total amount you need to pay? It costs $470.20 for each adult and $235.10 for each child and $75.00 for each translation you are getting the Citizenship Office to organise for you.
Total amount you need to pay ^

How would you like to pay? Answer yes next to the payment method you want to use.
Cheque or bank draft made payable to Department of Internal Affairs ^
Money order ^
Cash or Eftpos if you are applying in person ^
Credit card ^
Card number ^
Card expiry date (MM/YY) ^
Full name of cardholder ^
I authorise the Department of Internal Affairs to charge the total amount above to my credit or debit card.
Cardholder’s signature ^

Withdrawals and refunds
If your child doesn't meet the requirements for citizenship, you can withdraw the application and get a partial refund of the child application fee of $158.40. Part of the fee is kept to cover the costs of the initial processing of your application. Generally, we recommend that you withdraw and re-apply when they clearly meet all of the requirements. You will be advised of all your child's options by letter.