*** Transcriber's Note: Please set your voice synthesiser to read most punctuation. When you encounter the caret sign (^) at the end of a line, please enter the applicable information, if necessary. ***

Application for New Zealand Citizenship for Western Samoan Adult and Child
Raraunga Aotearoa - Tangata Hamoa

You will need to print and sign this form.

Use this form if you are a Western Samoan citizen and are applying for a grant of New Zealand citizenship.

If applying for a child who is under 16 years of age, both parents must give their consent before New Zealand citizenship can be granted.

Any extra information (guide notes) is included with the questions in this form.

Contact 0800 22 51 51 (New Zealand only) if you need help.


1. What is your full name?
Enter your title. Choose from Mr, Ms, Miss, Master or Other ^
First and middle names ^
Surname or family name ^


2. Are you male or female? ^


3. What is your date of birth? DD/MM/YYYY ^
You will need to bring or send your original birth certificate with your application.


4. Where were you born?
City, town or village where you were born ^
Country where you were born ^


5. What country or countries are you currently a citizen of? ^
If you are registered as a New Zealand citizen by descent, you will need to send us your original citizenship certificate.


6. Other citizenships.
If you have been a citizen of any country other than the ones you listed in question 5, for example, Tonga, Fiji, please enter them ^


7. Applying for the first time? Yes or no ^


8. What passports / travel documents do you have? 
Enter the document numbers of all the passports/travel documents that you have held in the last 5 years and the name of the country they are from. Include expired passports/travel documents ^
If you have the original passports, you need to bring or send them with your application.

9. Did you enter New Zealand before 15 September 1982? Yes or no ^
If you said yes, go to question 10.
If you said no,  go to question 11.


10. Do you have proof that you were in New Zealand on 14 September 1982? Yes or no ^
Your proof could include:

• your passport
• your travel document
• a letter from your employer, school, doctor or other place that we are able to check.

If you said yes, go to question 13.
If you said no, go to question 11. Also you can phone the Citizenship Office on 0800 22 51 51 for help.


11. Did you lawfully enter New Zealand any time after the 14th of September 1982? Yes or no ^
If you said yes, enter the date and go to question 12. (DD/MM/YYYY) ^ 
If you said no, phone the Citizenship Office on 0800 22 51 51 for help.


12. Do you have New Zealand residence?
You will have a stamp in your passport that is labelled 'residence permit' and has a date.
If you live overseas, your returning resident’s visa must not have expired.
‘New Zealand residence’ means you have a residence permit, a residence visa or a permanent residence visa issued by Immigration New Zealand or you are an Australian citizen or permanent resident.
Do you have New Zealand residence?  Yes or no ^
If you said yes, go to question 13.
If you said no, it is unlikely that you will be granted citizenship. Please phone the Citizenship Office on 0800 22 51 51 for help.


13. Are you filling in this form for a child? 
A child is someone who is under 16 years old. 
Both birth / adoptive / legal guardians must include their passports with this application and sign their consent.

Are you filling in this form for a child? Yes or no ^
If you said yes, go to question 16.
If you said no, you are an adult and filling out this form for yourself. Go to question 14.


14. Have you ever been married or joined in a civil union? Yes or no ^
If you said yes, you are or have been married, in a civil union, divorced or widowed. Go to question 15. 
If you said no, go to question 16. 


15. How many times have you been married or in a civil union? 
Enter the number here ^
Enter the first and last names of your wife / husband / civil union partner and the year of each marriage/civil union ^

You will need to provide all the original documents of each marriage, divorce or civil union with this form.


16. Have you ever used any other names or family names? Yes or no ^
Include all other names you are known as, or have been known as. For example: 
• adoptive names
• Matai names
• married names
• maiden names 
• official changes of name 
• English names 
• names used at school or work 
• any other names you have used

For each different name, enter your first name(s), surname or family name, the reason you used this name, and the years you used it ^

If you have officially changed your name, at any time, you will need to provide us with proof of this name change. 
If the other names you have used are not on any official documents you must list them on the form, but you don’t need to provide proof of them.

Parents' details
Mother or father means your birth or legal adoptive mother, father or parents.
Don't include step-parents, customary adoptions or parents who do not have legal guardianship.


17. Your mother’s details
Mother’s first and middle names. Please complete these details, even if your mother has died ^
Mother’s surname or family name ^
Mother’s citizenship(s)^


18. Your father's details
Father’s first and middle names. Please complete these details, even if your father has died ^
Father’s surname or family name ^
Father’s citizenship(s)^

19. Where do you live?
If you move or change address while your application is processing, please let your citizenship case officer know.
Street number or flat number ^
Street name ^
Suburb ^ 
Postcode^ 
Town / city ^

Contact information
Email address ^
Home phone ^ 
Mobile phone ^


20. What is your postal address?
This is where we will send your documents, papers and letters. 
Do you want them sent where you live? Yes or No ^
If you said yes, go to question 21.
If you said no, enter another address.
Business or agent’s name (if required) ^
Street number PO Box number ^
Street name ^
Suburb ^ 
Postcode ^
Town / city ^

 
21. Ceremonies – the Oath or Affirmation
If you are 14 years or older you must attend a ceremony. During the ceremony you will read aloud a statement that says you will be loyal to New Zealand.

You need to choose which statement you will say. You have a choice of 2 statements - either an oath or an affirmation.

The oath of allegiance is religious, and includes the words ‘so help me God’.

The affirmation of allegiance is non-religious and does not include the words ‘so help me God’.

Do you want to say the oath or the affirmation? ^


22. Ceremonies – English
The ceremony will be held in English. Can you speak English? Yes or No ^

The statement that you read out loud at the citizenship ceremony is written in English.
If you said no, the Ceremonies Team will be in touch with you. Samoan citizens under the Citizenship (Western Samoa) Act 1982, do not have to speak English to become New Zealand citizens.


23. If any of your family members are also applying for New Zealand citizenship would you like to go to a ceremony with them? Yes or No ^


24. Do you need any special assistance so that you can attend an interview or public ceremony? Yes or No ^
This could include needing access for a wheelchair, you can't use stairs at a venue, or you need help if you are hearing impaired. 
If you said yes, what help do you need? ^


25. Is there anything else we should know that might affect your application?
Some examples are: If you have ever used a different date of birth, if you have ever been deported from New Zealand or any other country, or anything else we should know.
If there's anything else we should know, enter it here ^


26. Did someone translate this form for you or help you interpret this form? Yes or No ^
This is a legal declaration, so the person translating needs to read it carefully before they sign it.
The person assisting you in interpreting / translating the form must be over 16 years old. 
I, [enter your name] ^ 
of [enter your address] ^
declare that I assisted the applicant to complete this application. I confirm that I truly and faithfully interpreted and translated all applicable questions in the application form, together with the answers given by the applicant and all other things that I have been required to interpret and translate. 

Their signature ^
Date signed (DD/MM/YYYY) ^


27. Applicant Declaration.

You must sign this declaration if:

• you are 16 years or older; and

• you have filled in your application form yourself; or

• you can sign your own name but someone else has filled in the application form for you.

If this form is for a child under 16, both parents must read and sign this section. The parent who filled in the application signs as ‘Parent 1’. This application must be received by the Department of Internal Affairs within 3 months of being signed and dated.

Warning: It is an offence to knowingly or recklessly give false information or conceal any facts for the purpose of gaining New Zealand citizenship for oneself or on behalf of someone. If you do so, you or your child may be denied / lose New Zealand citizenship, or face criminal charges, or both.

• I confirm that I am / or my child is a current Samoan citizen.
• I understand this application and warning.
• The documents provided for this application are genuine and unaltered.
• I understand that becoming a New Zealand citizen may affect my / or my child’s present citizenship.
• I understand that if I do not provide sufficient information to enable a claim to New Zealand citizenship, my / or my child’s application may not be approved. 
• If there is any change in my / or my child’s circumstances which affects the answers given in this application, I will send written advice to the Department of Internal Affairs up until the point I/or my child has received my / their citizenship certificate.
• I confirm that I have read and understood the guide notes, including the section relating to the Privacy Statement.
• I authorise the release by any government agency of personal information about me and / or my child which may assist the Minister of Internal Affairs to decide whether I / or my 
child qualify for the grant of citizenship. I recognise that this information may be provided by agencies including, but not limited to: New Zealand Police, Inland Revenue, New Zealand Customs Service, Immigration New Zealand, Ministry of Social Development, Passport Office, Births, Deaths and Marriages Registry, Ministry of Justice.
• I authorise the Department to release my / or my child’s name and address to my local Member of Parliament and local councillors in order that they can formally welcome me / or my child to New Zealand following my / their grant of citizenship.

Applicant declaration for anyone 16 years or older.
I declare that the information I have given in this application is, to the best of my knowledge, true, complete and correct.

Signature of applicant ^

Date signed (DD/MM/YYYY) ^

Parents’ consent and declaration for chidren under 16 years.

Sole Legal Guardianship
If only 1 parent / legal guardian is consenting, this parent should have sole legal guardianship. The Citizenship Office will require a court order that specifically refers to sole legal guardianship. 

A custody order on its own does not give sole legal guardianship over a child. If you are unsure, please call us on 0800 22 51 51 and someone will help you.

Both parents or guardians must include their passports with their child's application.

Consent statement
This consent section has been filled out by me as a parent / legal guardian. 

I consent to my child becoming a New Zealand citizen. I am aware that a grant of New Zealand citizenship may affect my child’s present citizenship. If my child is ineligible under the Citizenship (Western Samoa) Act 1982, I give the Citizenship Office my permission to assess my child’s eligibility under the Citizenship Act 1977, which includes giving authorisation to the Department of Internal Affairs to check my child’s record.

Parent / guardian number 1 - signing declaration and consent. 

I declare that the information I have given in this application is, to the best of my knowledge, true, complete and correct. 
Full name ^
Relationship to child ^
Signature of parent 1 ^
Date signed (DD/MM/YYYY) ^

Parent / guardian number 2 - signing consent.
Full name ^
Relationship to child^
Signature of parent 2 ^
Date signed (DD/MM/YYYY) ^ 


28. Witness section 
The witness must fill in this section in their own handwriting and write your full name on the back of 1 photo, sign and date the back of the photo.

Photo information
You need to give 2 identical colour photos that are less than 6 months old, and meet the listed requirements. We strongly recommend that you obtain your photos from a business that provides a passport photo service, as the business will help ensure that your photos meet our requirements. Photos that do not meet our requirements will not be accepted.

To help you to avoid some of the most common problems with photo quality, we have summarised the main requirements. If you need more detailed information about photos, call us on 0800 22 51 51. 
• 2 identical colour photos, less than 6 months old.
• Be a full front, close up view of the head and shoulders with the head covering 70% to 80% of the photograph.
• Be taken with a neutral expression (not smiling or frowning) with mouth closed. 
• Show you looking straight at the camera, and their head not tilted. 
• Show your eyes open and clearly visible, and no hair in their eyes.
• Without sunglasses. Tinted prescription glasses may be worn as long as eyes are still visible.
• A true image and not altered in any way.
• Clear, sharp and in focus with minimum reflective light on face. 
• No redeye.
• With a plain light coloured background (not white).
• Be of good quality colour and on high quality photographic paper, with no ink marks on the image (no inkjet printers).
• Passport-sized (45mm by 35mm).
• Glasses frames must not obscure the eyes.
• Do not trim the photos.

Who can be your witness?
A witness needs to hold a valid New Zealand passport or be an Internal Affairs representative. Type yes after the one that applies to you.
I am a Citizenship Case Officer or DIA Customer Services Officer ^
I hold a valid New Zealand Passport and the applicant is not related to me and we do not live at the same address ^

Type your New Zealand Passport number ^
How many years you have known the applicant? Years ^ 

Type your name
Surname or family name ^
First and middle names ^
Type your date of birth (DD/MM/YYYY) ^
Type your address and contact details 
Unit or house number ^ 
Street name ^
Suburb ^
City or town ^ 
Post code ^
State ^
Country ^
Home phone ^
Daytime phone ^

New Zealand passport holder declaration
I declare that:
• I am 16 years of age or over.
• I have known the child for more than 1 year.
• The information I have given is complete and correct to the best of my knowledge.
• The person in this photo is the person applying for citizenship.
• I have written the full name of the child, signed my name and written the date on the back of 1 photograph. 
• I understand that if I have provided false information, I can, by law, be fined or imprisoned. 

Please check carefully. Have you written the 3 things on the back of one of the photos correctly?
Do not staple, glue or paperclip photos to the application as this may cause damage. Ensure your photo has been correctly witnessed to avoid delays in processing.

Signature of witness ^
Date signed (DD/MM/YYYY) ^


29. Checklist

Before you bring or send us your application, please make sure you have everything you need. If you don't provide all the original documents that you need to, your application will be delayed. 
All original documents will be returned to you by courier or at an interview.

Don't bring or send photocopies. 

Everyone needs to bring or send with their application:
•	adult’s or child’s full birth certificate, or equivalent
•	if you are adopted, adoption papers (Order of Adoption, pre-adoptive, and post-adoptive birth certificates)
•	current passport(s) / travel documents or equivalent (or most recent if it has expired)
•	if you are aged under 16 years, both parents’ passports
•	2 passport photos (less than 6 months old), certified by a witness
•	the application fee ($470.20 per adult, $235.10 per child).

Depending on your answers to previous questions, you may need to include documents showing:

•	proof you were in New Zealand on 14 September 1982
•	all your marriage / civil union / divorce / name change documents, and
•	anything else we should know that might affect your application.

If your documents aren't in English
If any documents are not in English, you must either:

• pay us a translation fee of $75 per document if you wish the Department of Internal Affairs to translate the key information in your documents, or
• include an authorised translation (with the original document).

You can have your documents translated by 1 of the following:

• the Department of Internal Affairs; or
• an authorised translation agency (for a list of authorised agencies please see our website or contact us); or
• the issuing Government agency; or
• a court in the country of origin, provided they have been authenticated by that country’s diplomatic post in New Zealand.

Don’t provide translations done by family members or friends. 

You might also need to include:

•	authorised translations, if your documents are not in English
•	a translation fee if you wish the Department of Internal Affairs to translate your documents.

If you are unable to give us these documents, you will need to explain why here, or you could include a letter with your application. ^

O lenei fa‘aaliga o le ‘a fesoasoani lea ia te oe i le sauniuniga o pepa sa‘o o lo‘o mana‘omia mo lau tusi apalai mo le sitiseni po‘o le tagatanu‘u.
O Ulua‘i pepa (originals) e tatau ona lafoina mai ma lau tusi apalai. 
Aua ne‘i lafoina maia ni kopi o ulua‘i pepa. O le a matou le taliaina ni kopi.
O pepa nei e tatau ona e lafoina mai ma lau tusi apalai:
• Pepa Fanau 
• Tusi Folau
O Tusi Folau uma e aofia ai le 5 tausaga ua mavae.

Afai ua suia lou igoa i so‘o se mafua‘aga lava, e tatau ona e lafo maia mea nei:
• Pepa Fa‘aipoipo/Pepa o le Tatalaga o le Fa’aipoipoga 
Afai ua suia lou igoa ona ua e fa‘aipoipo fa‘amolemole e lafo mai pepa fa‘aipoipo po‘o pepa e   fa‘amaonia ai ua tatala le fa‘aipoipoga, mo au fa‘aipoipoga uma na fai.
• Isi Pepa Fa‘amaonia o le Suiga o Lou Igoa (Fa‘ata‘ita‘iga: Pepa Faamaonia mai le Resitara o lou Suafa Matai)
Afai ua suia lou igoa fa‘aletulafono, fa‘amolemole lafo mai tusi fa‘amaonia o le suiga o lou igoa.
• Pepa o le Vaetamaina 
Afai na vaetamaina oe faaletulafono, e tatau ona e lafoina mai lou ulua‘i pepa fanau, lou pepa fanau fou ma pepa o le vaetamaina.
Afai e le o ia te oe nei pepa fa‘amaonia, e mafai ona e fa‘afeso‘ota‘ia le Ofisa o le Lesitara o e Fananau, Maliliu, Fa‘aipoipo ma Vaetamaina, Matagaluega o Faamasinoga, P O Box 1151, Apia, Samoa ma talosaga i ai ina ia lafoina mai nei pepa ia te oe. E mafai fo‘i ona e fa‘afeso‘ota‘ia le tou konesula mo se fesoasoani:

Samoan High Commission to New Zealand 
Street Address: 1A Wesley Road, Kelburn, Wellington 6012. 
Postal Address: PO Box 1430, Wellington 6140. 
Telefoni: 04 472 0953
Fasimeli: 04 471 2479 
I-meli: info@samoa.org.nz
Fa‘amolemole ia manatua o lenei lisi o pepa fa‘amaonia e le o le lisi mulimuli lea. O le tagata o le a vaaia lau tusi apalai mo le sitiseni o le a logoina oe pe a toe mana‘omia nisi o pepa fa‘amaonia e toe lafoina mai i se taimi mulimuli pe talosagaina fo‘i oe e te fa‘atasi atu i se fa‘atalatalanoaga (interview).
Mo nisi fa‘amatalaga e uiga i le fa‘atumuina o lau talosaga mo le sitiseni (tagatanu’u), pepa e talia ma le fa‘aliliu upu fa‘amolemole ia tagai va‘ai i le ta‘iala mo le fa‘atumuina o tusi apalai i le (www.govt.nz/citizenship), vala‘au mai i le 0800 22 51 51 pe asiasi ane fo‘i i se tasi o a matou ofisa i (Aukilani, Manukau, Ueligitone, Kalaiesetete).


30. If you want someone else to talk to us on your behalf, you will need to include a signed letter that provides the following information:
1. The person’s name or company name.
2. Their postal address.
3. Their contact phone number, email address or cell phone number.

Representatives can be any person you choose e.g. a family member, a friend, an immigration agent. 
We will only contact your representative and all your documents will be sent to them.


31. Contact with the Citizenship Office
If you change your address or travel overseas while we are processing your application, you must tell us. If the Citizenship 
Office is unable to contact you because you have moved or are overseas, or you do not respond, your application will be 
presented to the Minister of Internal Affairs for a decision based on the information available. 

Citizenship Office contact details
Freephone: 0800 22 51 51 (New Zealand only) 
Phone: (+64 4) 463 9361 (outside New Zealand)
Email: citizenship@dia.govt.nz 
Website: www.govt.nz/citizenship
Postal address: 
Department of Internal Affairs 
PO Box 10680
Wellington, 6143


32. Lodging your application and documents

By appointment.
You can make an appointment to come to 1 of our offices. At the office you will meet a citizenship case officer 
who will:
• Help you complete the form, including acting as a witness and certifying your photographs. If applying for your child who is under 16, please ensure they are with you at the appointment if you need the citizenship officer to act as a witness.
• Assess your eligibility before you pay the fee.
• Photocopy and give back your documents.

We offer appointments in Whangarei, Auckland, Manukau, Hamilton, Rotorua, Tauranga, Palmerston North, Napier, New Plymouth, Wellington, Nelson, Christchurch, Queenstown and Dunedin. Please call us freephone on 0800 22 51 51 to make an appointment.

By post.
If you want to post us your application, we advise you to use a ‘track and trace’ courier bag from New Zealand Post 
(within New Zealand) or registered mail (from overseas) to keep track of the original documents. We will send your documents back to you by courier.

Post your application to: 
Department of Internal Affairs 
PO Box 10680
Wellington 6143


33. Fees and payment
We cannot start processing your application until you have paid your application fee.

Are you making the payment for your application? Answer yes next to the option that applies to you.
No. My payment is being made by another applicant ^
Yes. I am making the payment for my application on this form ^

What is the total amount you need to pay? It costs $470.20 for each adult and $235.10 for each child and $75.00 for each translation you are getting the Citizenship Office to organise for you.
Total amount you need to pay ^

How would you like to pay? Answer yes next to the payment method you want to use.
Cheque or bank draft made payable to Department of Internal Affairs ^
Money order ^
Cash or Eftpos if you are applying in person ^
Credit card ^
Card number ^
Card expiry date (MM/YY) ^
Full name of cardholder ^
I authorise the Department of Internal Affairs to charge the total amount above to my credit or debit card.
Cardholder’s signature ^

If you choose to withdraw your application, you may be eligible for a partial refund of $158.40. Part of the fee is kept to cover the costs of the initial processing of your application.