*** Transcriber's Note: Please set your voice synthesiser to read most 
punctuation. When you encounter the caret sign at the end of a line, please enter the applicable information, if necessary. ***

HOME EQUITY RELEASE SCHEMES CODE OF STANDARDS.
Introduction.
1.
This is a voluntary code of standards for organisations that offer home equity
release schemes and agree to be bound by the code. If you are a homeowner
considering using a scheme this guide explains what you should expect and
helps you to understand your rights and the risks involved.

What are home equity release schemes?
2.
Many older people own their own home mortgage free but do not have enough
cash to meet their living costs. Some organisations offer home equity release
schemes that let you receive money against the value of your home. There are
two main types of scheme.
3.
A reverse mortgage scheme allows you to borrow against the equity in your
home. Equity means how much the home is worth minus how much is owed on
the mortgage. Interest is added to the money you borrow, and the loan is not
repaid until you die, permanently leave your home, or sell it. Usually, if there is
more than one person borrowing the money or staying in the home (for
example, a married couple) the loan is due to be repaid when the last surviving
person named in the agreement dies or permanently leaves the house.
4.
A reversion scheme is where you sell all or part of your home and after the
settlement have the right to stay in the house as a tenant. You might sell your
home to the financial service provider, or the financial service provider might
facilitate the sale to another party. If you only sell part of your interest in the
house and the value of the house increases you and the purchaser will share
the increased value as agreed in advance between you both. You might be
required to set aside funds to cover rental payments over the expected term of
the tenancy.
5.
Both types of scheme can be risky because people who use them usually have
no other major assets and little income. This means that their ability to respond
to other adverse life circumstances that may arise will likely be limited. 

How to use the code.
6.
This is a code that the Ministry of Social Development believes financial
providers should follow. You can use the code as a guide to things you should
look for when considering providers and their products.
7.
The guide describes principles that you should look for in home equity release
schemes. After the principles there is more detail describing the differences
between the two main types of schemes and setting out obligations, protections
and processes for providers and clients, and a table comparing the key
differences between reverse mortgage schemes and reversion schemes.
8.
The code uses the word “provider” to mean all financial service providers that
have agreed to be bound by the code.
9.
This code is voluntary and is not legally binding. If you are considering a home
equity release scheme it is essential that you take independent legal advice
(which should cost no more than a standard conveyancing). If you do not have 
a lawyer, contact the New Zealand Law Society for a list of lawyers in your area
that give advice on these schemes.

What is not covered.
10.
The code does not cover:

• private arrangements between family members
• social assistance such as local council rate deferral schemes or
• residential care subsidy loans from the government.

Further information.
11.
Further information is available from the Retirement Commissioner:
www.sorted.org.nz and from the provider industry body, the Safe Home
Equity Release Plans Association (SHERPA) website 
www.sherpa.org.nz.